Diabetes Screening Tests
42 CFR § 410.18

Effective Date: November 16, 2023

A. General

Medicare Part B covers diabetes screening tests after a referral from a physician or qualified nonphysician practitioner to an individual at risk for diabetes for the purpose of early detection of diabetes.

B. Covered Tests

The following tests are covered if all other conditions are met:

1. Fasting blood glucose test (CPT 82947)
2. Post-glucose challenges including, but not limited to:
   - Oral glucose tolerance test with a glucose challenge of 75 grams of glucose for non-pregnant adults
   - 2-hour post glucose challenge test alone
3. Hemoglobin A1C test (CPT 83036)
4. Other tests as determined by the Secretary through a national coverage determination

C. Frequency Limitations

Medicare covers TWO tests within the 12-month period following the date of the most recent diabetes screening test of that individual.

This frequency applies to all beneficiaries regardless of prior diagnoses.

D. Eligible Risk Factors

Individuals with the following risk factors are eligible to receive the benefit:

1. Hypertension
2. Dyslipidemia (abnormal cholesterol or triglycerides)
3. Obesity, defined as a body mass index greater than or equal to 30 kg/m²
4. Prior identification of impaired fasting glucose or glucose intolerance
5. Any two of the following characteristics:
   a. Overweight, defined as body mass index greater than 25, but less than 30 kg/m²
   b. A family history of diabetes
   c. 65 years of age or older
   d. A history of gestational diabetes mellitus or delivery of a baby weighing more than 9 pounds

E. Coverage Conditions

- Tests must be ordered by a physician or qualified nonphysician practitioner
- Tests must be performed in a CLIA-certified laboratory
- Beneficiary must have at least one eligible risk factor
- No coinsurance or deductible applies to these preventive screening tests

F. Non-Covered Services

Diabetes screening tests performed more frequently than two times within a 12-month period are not covered unless determined medically necessary for diagnostic (not screening) purposes.

Tests performed for diagnostic purposes (rather than screening) are covered under different Medicare benefit categories with different frequency and coverage criteria.
